Read only jenkins announcement (#3279)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2020/05/2020-05-18-read-only-jenkins-announcement.adoc

---
layout: post

> title: "Read only jenkins announcement"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Read-only Jenkins Configuration"
```
It seems none of the other announcements use that word in the title https://www.jenkins.io/node/tags/announcement/

tags:
- system-read
- extended-read
- configuration-as-code
- announcement
author: timja
---

> I'm excited to announce that the 'read-only' Jenkins feature is now available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I'm excited to announce that the 'read-only' Jenkins feature is now available for preview.
This feature allows restricting configuration UIs and APIs while providing access to essential Jenkins system configuration, diagnostics, and self-monitoring tools through Web UI.
Such mode is critical for instances managed as code, e.g. with plugin:configuration-as-code[Jenkins Configuration-as-Code] plugin.
It is delivered as a part of the jep:224[Readonly system configuration] effort.
```

Author: perfect thanks! I definitely meant to mention the jep!

You will want to use at least version TODO (waiting for agent to be released) of Jenkins.

Read-only Jenkins currently allows users to have access to:

* job configuration
* system configuration
* plugin manager
* system logs
* cloud configuration
* agent configuration
* agent logs

For more planned integrations see the jira:JENKINS-12548[] epic.

Read-only Jenkins is split into three permissions:

> * Job/ExtendedRead

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Job/ExtendedRead** - Read-only access to job configurations
```

  - existed since 2009 but the UI didn't do anything to indicate to the users
  that they couldn't edit the job configuration page, this has now been adapted to the new read-only engine.

> * Agent/ExtendedRead

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Agent/ExtendedRead** - Read-only access to agent configurations
```

>   - existed since 2013 but it was undocumented and only allowed access to API and no UI

Reviewer 2: Add entry about it being released? Next weekly would be a safe ETA IMHO

> * Overall/SystemRead

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Overall/SystemRead** - System-wide read-only access.
     It is very useful for Jenkins instances managed as code, e.g. with help of the plugin:configuration-as-code[Jenkins Configuration as Code Plugin].
  - Introduced in Jenkins 2.222 as a part of jep:224[Readonly system configuration]
```

Reviewer 3: Misleading description fixed up in https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/pull/3897

Allowing non administrator users to debug issues with their builds easier, i.e. given a 'Jenkins' error message in a build the user can check:

1. which plugins are installed, 
2. the version of the plugin

This can allow the user to solve their issue themselves and makes it easier for the user to report an issue with a plugin directly to the maintainers.

== What can I expect

All built in UI controls have been adapted to clearly distinguish between
an editable control and a control you don't have permission to edit:

Editable:

image:/images/post-images/2020/05-read-only-jenkins-announcement/build-discarder-edit.png[]

Non editable:

image:/images/post-images/2020/05-read-only-jenkins-announcement/build-discarder-read.png[]

_Note: there are other controls such as in the credentials and pipeline plugins that have
not been updated yet._

Action buttons, (Such as 'Save' and 'Apply') have been hidden in most cases.

There is more work on this needed, some plugins need support added and certain controls 
could have some improvements done to render better.

== How can I use it?

These permissions are currently available in beta and for now disabled by default,

> you can enable them by installing the plugin:extended-read-permission[Extended read permission plugin].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you can enable them by installing the plugin:extended-read-permission[Extended read permission plugin] v3.2 or above.
```

want to consider creating a role containing the required permissions._

Here is an example using the plugin:configuration-as-code[Configuration as Code plugin] and the plugin:folder-auth[Folder-based Authorization Strategy plugin]:

[source,yaml]
----
jenkins:
  authorizationStrategy:
    folderBased:
      globalRoles:
        - name: "admin"
          permissions:
            - id: "Overall/Administer"
          sids:
            - "admin"
        - name: "global read"
          permissions:
            - id: "Agent/ExtendedRead"
            - id: "Overall/SystemRead"
            - id: "Overall/Read"
            - id: "Job/Read"
            - id: "Job/ExtendedRead"
          sids:
            - "reader" 
----

== I can't see a configuration that I think should be allowed

Most of Jenkins itself has been updated to support read-only Jenkins, but not very many plugins,
please create an enhancement issue on the plugins issue tracker, if they use Jira then
you can add it to the jira:JENKINS-12548[] epic.

== How do I update my plugin to support it

See the link:/doc/developer/views/read-only/[Read only view] section of the developer documentation.

== What's next

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

In this release we introduce a foundation feature which is already supported in all key Jenkins core controls and in some plugins.
There are many plugins which contribute to Global configurations and diagnostics which still need to be adapted to support the new mode.
We will keep working on this feature and its adoption so that the next LTS baseline in September provides a full-fledged user experience for Jenkins admins. 

```

---
layout: post
title: "Read-only Jenkins Configuration"
tags:
- system-read
- extended-read
- configuration-as-code
- announcement
author: timja
---

I'm excited to announce that the 'read-only' Jenkins feature is now available for preview.
This feature allows restricting configuration UIs and APIs while providing access to essential Jenkins system configuration, diagnostics, and self-monitoring tools through Web UI.
Such mode is critical for instances managed as code, e.g. with plugin:configuration-as-code[Jenkins Configuration-as-Code] plugin.
It is delivered as a part of the jep:224[Readonly system configuration] effort.

You will want to use at least Jenkins 2.238 to have all the features mentioned in this post.

Read-only Jenkins currently allows users to have access to:

* job configuration
* system configuration
* plugin manager
* system logs
* cloud configuration
* agent configuration
* agent logs

For more planned integrations see the jira:JENKINS-12548[] epic.

Read-only Jenkins is split into three permissions:

> * **Job/ExtendedRead** - Read-only accesJenkins 2.238s to job configurations

Reviewer 4: Unexpected word insertion?
```suggestion
* **Job/ExtendedRead** - Read-only access to job configurations
```

  - existed since 2009 but the UI didn't do anything to indicate to the users

>   that they couldn't edit the job configuration page, this has now been adapted to the new read-only engine.

Reviewer 4: Sentence break for easier reading.
```suggestion
  that they couldn't edit the job configuration page.
  This has now been adapted to the new read-only engine.
```

* **Agent/ExtendedRead** - Read-only access to agent configurations
  - existed since 2013 but it was undocumented and only allowed access to API and no UI
  - UI support added in Jenkins 2.238
* **Overall/SystemRead** - System-wide read-only access.
     It is very useful for Jenkins instances managed as code, e.g. with help of the plugin:configuration-as-code[Jenkins Configuration as Code Plugin].
  - Introduced in Jenkins 2.222 as a part of jep:224[Readonly system configuration]

You can selectively grant the permission(s) as you wish.

== Why do I want this?

Given the rise of the configuration-as-code plugin a lot of Jenkins instances are fully managed as code, 

> which mean that no changes are allowed through the UI. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
which means that no changes are allowed through the UI. 
```

The problem with this is you don’t know when new plugin versions are available and in order to see what other configuration options are available to a plugin you currently need the 'Administer' permission.

> Allowing non administrator users to debug issues with their builds easier, i.e. given a 'Jenkins' error message in a build the user can check:

Reviewer 4: Possible alternate phrasing.
```suggestion
Read-only access to system administration information allows users who are not administrators to more easily debug build issues.
For example, given a 'Jenkins' error message in a build the user can check:
```

> 1. which plugins are installed, 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. which plugins are installed
```

2. the version of the plugin

This can allow the user to solve their issue themselves and makes it easier for the user to report an issue with a plugin directly to the maintainers.

== What can I expect

All built in UI controls have been adapted to clearly distinguish between
an editable control and a control you don't have permission to edit:

Editable:

image:/images/post-images/2020/05-read-only-jenkins-announcement/build-discarder-edit.png[]

Non editable:

image:/images/post-images/2020/05-read-only-jenkins-announcement/build-discarder-read.png[]

_Note: there are other controls such as in the credentials and pipeline plugins that have
not been updated yet._

Action buttons, (Such as 'Save' and 'Apply') have been hidden in most cases.

> There is more work on this needed, some plugins need support added and certain controls 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Work will continue on read-only configuration.  Some plugins need support added and certain controls
```

could have some improvements done to render better.

== How can I use it?

> These permissions are currently available in beta and for now disabled by default,
> you can enable them by installing the plugin:extended-read-permission[Extended read permission plugin] v3.2 or above.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
These permissions are currently available in beta and for now disabled by default.
You can enable them by installing the plugin:extended-read-permission[Extended read permission plugin] v3.2 or above.
```

> Then you will need to add the following permissions to a user / group depending on your usecase:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Then you will need to add the following permissions to a user / group depending on your use case:
```

* Overall/SystemRead
* Job/ExtendedRead
* Agent/ExtendedRead

> _Note: You will need to set the Overall/Read and Job/Read permissions as well, you might

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
_Note: You will need to set the Overall/Read and Job/Read permissions as well.  You might
```

want to consider creating a role containing the required permissions._

Here is an example using the plugin:configuration-as-code[Configuration as Code plugin] and the plugin:folder-auth[Folder-based Authorization Strategy plugin]:

[source,yaml]
----
jenkins:
  authorizationStrategy:
    folderBased:
      globalRoles:
        - name: "admin"
          permissions:
            - id: "Overall/Administer"
          sids:
            - "admin"
        - name: "global read"
          permissions:
            - id: "Agent/ExtendedRead"
            - id: "Overall/SystemRead"
            - id: "Overall/Read"
            - id: "Job/Read"
            - id: "Job/ExtendedRead"
          sids:
            - "reader" 
----

== I can't see a configuration that I think should be allowed

> Most of Jenkins itself has been updated to support read-only Jenkins, but not very many plugins,
> please create an enhancement issue on the plugins issue tracker, if they use Jira then
> you can add it to the jira:JENKINS-12548[] epic.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Most of Jenkins itself has been updated to support read-only Jenkins, but not very many plugins.
Please create an enhancement issue on the plugins issue tracker.
If the plugin uses Jira to track issues, then you can add it to the jira:JENKINS-12548[] epic.
```

== How do I update my plugin to support it

See the link:/doc/developer/views/read-only/[Read only view] section of the developer documentation.

== What's next

In this release we introduce a foundation feature which is already supported in all key Jenkins core controls and in some plugins.

> There are many plugins which contribute to Global configurations and diagnostics which still need to be adapted to support the new mode.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are many plugins which contribute to global configurations and diagnostics which still need to be adapted to support the new mode.
```
